---
layout: post
title:  "Why Your Organistaion Should Invest in Knowledge Architecture"
date:   2019-07-01 08:00:00 +1000
tags: [articles, knowledge architecture]
background: '/img/earth-lights.jpg'
excerpt: Make better decisions by looking at the whole picture, not just pieces of it
---

# Why Your Organisation Should Invest in Knowledge Architecture

{{ page.date | date: '%d %B, %Y' }}

Across many industries and fields of endeavour, there are few organisations successfully operating in the modern era that aren’t both consumers and producers of data. This isn’t really a new phenomena - throughout the industrial era that defined much of the 20th century, organisations and businesses alike would take some form of data, process and understand it, and use that knowledge to improve their ability to deliver on their mission.

What has changed fundamentally is the arrival of inexpensive, scalable platforms that can generate very large datasets, and the creation of new tools and techniques to extract meaning from them. These technologies offer a lot of promise to organisations looking to properly manage their data, but they’re often deployed in ad-hoc ways, used to solve a specific problem for a specific department in a way that doesn’t allow the greater group to benefit.

_Knowledge architecture is the strategic arrangement of data resources into a context-aware framework, to provide a connected and interpretable view of an organisation’s data that empowers better decision-making._

### What Are The Costs of Not Investing in Knowledge Architecture?

**1. Collecting big data can lead to bigger problems**

Popularised in the early 2000’s, the term big data refers to the recent explosion in capabilities to collect and store datasets that are often too large to interpret through traditional means. The term ‘big’ is relative in this context - it could apply equally to the small community group that receives data from several dozen participants, or an international organisation trying to coordinate operations in multiple countries and timezones. This is because while the scale of collection might change, the complexity in how to interpret and make sense of the data is constant.

It’s worth thinking a bit deeper on why this is the case. Almost any new technology employed by an organisation immediately begins to yield data - online financial systems produce records of expenses and income. Inventory systems record quantities, locations and statuses of resources. Workflow management systems produce historical data on who has worked on what, the nature of the work, the problems overcome and the outcome achieved. Each of these streams of data fulfill an important role in helping people understand how the organisation functions, but they are often fragmented and kept inaccessible through different methods of storage and interpretation. Financial data might exist in graphs, inventory data in spreadsheets, workflow data in unstructured human-written text, seemingly disconnected from more structured types of data.

Without a cohesive framework in which to connect these different types of data, organisations cannot make well-informed decisions. If they’re lucky their people are willing to spend the time moving from source to source, constructing a mental picture on which to base their decisions, but this is inherently slow and difficult. If they’re not, their people simply make decisions based on incomplete information. Either approach doesn’t result in a good outcome.

**2. Losing sight of your mission happens easily amongst increasing complexity**

There is a period early on in most organisations’ lifetime when the mission is clear and complexity is minimal. Most organisations exist to solve a problem in the real world, and are started by someone who believes they can solve it. But if it survives for long enough, the work of any group begins to increase in complexity, either because the nature of that work changes or their approach to it evolves.

This is especially true for endeavours that operate in human-centric fields. Groups of people come together, interact and break apart in ways that sometimes defy the basic logic of humanism and reasoning. Yet it is these groups that many organisations need to understand most in order to achieve their mission. Without a coherent framework in which to make sense of data generated by these groups, simply managing the task of interpreting meaning can easily deprive your mission of the focus it requires.

**3. Misunderstandings across multiple datasets are more likely**

It doesn’t have to be as spectacular as the infamous [Lockheed Martin/NASA, imperial/metric failure that destroyed the Mars Climate Orbiter in 1999](http://edition.cnn.com/TECH/space/9909/30/mars.metric.02/){:target="_blank"} - any collection of datasets is likely to include assumptions on how to appropriately format and present different types of data. Even when not mission-critical, these assumptions can lead to poor outcomes when attempting to connect them ad-hoc without prior understanding of their differences.

A well engineered knowledge framework considers these issues of convention as a starting point, and abstracts away technical differences to create a seamless fabric of data to base decisions on. Data that might be essentially reporting the same thing under different terminology can also be appropriately handled, bringing further clarity to the decision-making process.

### What Are The Benefits of Investing in Knowledge Architecture?

**1. It allows one generation of workers to inform the next, without needing to do extra work**

Most organisations have experienced the negative impact of losing a long-serving employee, someone who deeply understood how to get things done. These people become so valuable and difficult to replace because they learn through experience how to navigate the work environment and find ways to succeed, in spite of any technical limitations that exist. They develop instinctive knowledge of an organisation, and then one day they leave, and the knowledge is gone.

Good knowledge architecture is capable of evolving to capture these peoples’ experiences and insights as they are learned, rather than the conventional approach of hoping documentation might be written when time permits. If someone brings online a new stream of data because it helps them in their role, that data should easily assimilate into the framework, to benefit everyone. Building infrastructure with collaboration at its core is the key to achieving this.

**2. It unlocks more dimensions to your data, allowing for the discovery of unexpected trends**

It is one thing to know the state of your organisation and what your data is telling you today. It is another experience entirely to know that in relation to how the situation looked last week, last month and last year, and where it might be heading in the future. Perhaps your operations are running normally, or perhaps they are currently abnormal in response to an unusual event. Or perhaps they’re quietly, steadily moving in a direction that hasn’t been fully realised yet. Whatever the reality, if you only have a single point-in-time view of data you’re not able to easily factor these trends into your decision-making process and respond to changes that affect your ability to carry out your mission.

Knowledge architecture that has been built with consideration of how your organisation functions over time can capture the appropriate time-related aspects of your data, connecting them in ways that give you additional insights. It’s never too late to reappraise your situation with trend analysis in mind, as even a relatively short history of data changes can help to start understanding where your organisation is going.

**3. Important innovations often happen between departments, not solely within them**

Conversations around data often use the term silos. This refers to the idea that data of a specific type is usually stored by itself, because that’s how it’s worked on by the relevant department, and that’s how our minds like to organise things. You don’t put your knives, spoons and forks all in the same compartment in your kitchen drawer. You separate them out, because that’s how you use them. Same thing for a tradesman and their toolbox, same thing for a librarian and their books.

The difference when organising data is that it carries much more nuance and connection than utensils, tools or books, and there is considerable potential for unlocking new opportunities and perspectives when combed into one cohesive view. This isn’t just about one department having a better understand of what another is doing, but about using modern technologies to surface relations and causes that couldn’t be seen before. ‘Happy accidents’ often occur in this way, and knowledge architecture makes this possible.

### How do I get started?

If you’ve decided to take a serious look at your organisation’s knowledge architecture, it’s worth making sure you proceed in the right way to get the most out of your investment. Depending on where you’re starting from the process may look different, but the following steps are generally a good starting point.

**1. Talk to your people to understand _their_ problems and knowledge gaps**

Planning your knowledge architecture should always begin by understanding the problems that it is trying to solve. Too often, emerging technologies are offered as 1-size-fits-all solutions, but any project that doesn’t clearly benefit an organisation’s workers in carrying out their roles is unlikely to endure.

The people who know best what problems are affecting an organisation are those working within it. They shouldn’t be expected to define the solutions, but they should be listened to very carefully when understanding the current situation. These aren’t always easy conversations to have - discussing problems is sometimes assumed to be intertwined with ideas around responsibility and blame. An external party helping you through this process can be a good idea.

**2. Identify and understand your existing sources of data**

Choosing the right technical path to proceed on requires understanding the different types of data that you’re working with, so organising a complete inventory is a sensible starting point.

This is also a good time to start looking at the different characteristics of your datasets, especially as they relate to each other. What is each type of data telling you, or not telling you? How is each similar to the others, or how is different? Spending some time thinking about these questions can help determine the right approach to connecting your data.

**3. Choose the right tools for the job**

Only once you have a clear idea of the problems you are trying to solve, and fully understand your organisation’s data landscape should you move to selecting and implementing a technology stack. This is counter to the way that a lot of technical processes occur, but as previously mentioned it helps guard against new, over-hyped products being seen as the easy solution, to a problem that may not exist.

The right technology choices will depend on your organisation’s unique situation, but there are some recurring themes, Thinking about your data as streams of events or changes, rather than a simple last-known state, can help with trend identification. Similarly, technologies that promote the value of relationships between entities in your data can help connect seemingly unrelated sources, delivering a consistent picture of the organisation’s state across all aspects.

### Final Thoughts

Knowledge architecture is not a new concept, but the way to achieve it in a modern, data-driven environment has changed. Most organisations don’t lack data - in fact, they are now often having to content with trying to manage too much data. At the same time, decisions are needing to be made based on fragmented, static sources, that can’t be related to each other in the meaningful ways that they should be.

Setting out to address your organisation’s knowledge management can sometimes be met with resistance, because it’s often discussed alongside machine learning and artificial intelligence, technologies that have been used to automate certain types of human work. True knowledge architecture isn’t about replacing people with technology though - it’s about empowering them to make better decisions. There are countless fields (especially those focused on human-centric endeavours, as previously mentioned) where only an experienced, aware and empathetic human-being can decide how to proceed, working with other people in a way that respects their background and culture, and preserves their dignity. Basing these decisions on connected, accurate data that richly describes the environment is a step towards better outcomes for all.

Knowledge architecture consumes data, and sets about putting it to work. Data by itself is interesting. Data turned into information is compelling. Information turned into knowledge is actionable.
